---
title: Core Aspects of Transparency
---

## Commonly asked questions about algorithmic transparency

Here we present the core aspects of algorithmic transparency in the form of "frequently asked questions" sequence.

<br>

### What are some examples of algorithms and algorithmic transparency?

Algorithms have completely profileated the public and private sector, and ultimately our lives. Algorithms determine which movies are recommended to us on Netflix, what pages are at seen at the top of your Google search result, and even makes recommendations on what word we should type next in a text message. Many of these algorithms are not transparent, but here are 3 examples of algorithmic systems that _do_ have transparency in the wild:

- Many banks uses algorithms to determine if an applicant should be accepted or denied for a loan. By law, if an algorithm recommends to reject an applicant, that algorithm must provide _reason codes_ that are given to the applicant, such as "Too many recently opened \[bank\] accounts with balances"

- Many schools across the US have begun using algorithms to identify students that are risk of failing out of school. These systems are called _Early Warning Systems_, and provide a score to school administrators and teachers for how likely a student is to fail. To support transparency, the algorithms behind the Early Warning Systems are made extremely simple, and normally involve adding up aspects like "how many times has the student been absent?", "how many classes have they failed in the past", and "how many times has the student been sent to detention?"

- Many companies uses _algorithmic hiring tools_ to process resumes that they recieve from online job applicants. These tools are meant to "read" through resumes and select the best candidates for interviews. In New York City, it is now law that companies __must__ inform job applicants that their resume is being processed by an algorithm rather than a human.

Later in this course we will access _how succesful_ these 3 transparency measures really are.

### Why should one care about transparency?

There are many reasons why algorithmic transparency is important. You will learn many of these reasons as you work through this course, but to start with, here are three:

* Transparency can play a critical role in avoiding the significant risks and harms associated with algorithmic decision systems. These risks include performance risks like algorithmic errors, security risks, control risks like rogue outcomes and unintended consequences, economic risks, ethical risks, and societal risks like unfair outcomes for underprivileged or marginalized communities.

* Transparency may improve your algorithmic systems. Transparency can increase trust among all the stakeholders of an system, which may lead to better outcomes for that system.

* Implementing transparency will soon likely be law. Governments around the world have begun to draft and inact legislation regulating the transparency of algorithmic systems, including two major proposals in both the EU and US.

<br>

### Who is transparency for?

Transparency impacts many stakeholders both internally to and externally of an organization. We have already mentioned a few thus far, like \textbf{building trust among users.} Another important stakeholder is an individual affected by the outcome of an algorithmic system. For example, if an individual is deciding whether or not to apply for a job, it is advisable to make them aware that they will be assessed by an algorithmic system and what criteria will be used for assessment.

Other stakeholders may also include the public and public administration, like policymakers. Later in this course we give a complete list of potential stakeholders of transparency.

<br>

### Is it easy to implement transparency?

The short answer is yes. It is trivial to add basic transparency to algorithmic decision-making systems. For example, a first step could be as simple as telling people that you are *using* an algorithmic decision-making system (many organizations keep this fact hidden from the public), and telling them what factors it considers.

The long answer is that, while it can be easy to create basic transparency features, one should be thoughtful about _how_ they implement these features and _what_ these features are. This is discussed in detail throughout the course, inclduing content for both technical and non-technical audiences. 

<br>

### I've heard of "black-box" algorithms. Can they be made transparent?

Yes. In recent years, researchers and practitioners have made significant developments in "opening up" complex, opaque systems called **black-boxes** There are many powerful, free, and easy-to-use tools that can be used to gain insight into how underlying black-box algorithms work. The most popular tool is called SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP).

This topic will be unpacked extensively later in this course.

> **Black-box** is a blanket term used to describe __any system__ in which a human cannot see the inner workings of the algorithm.

<br>

### How is algorithmic transparency different from fairness or bias?

Algorithmic transparency is often confused with ideas like _fairness_ and _bias._ These are examples what algorithmic transparency _is not_.

Algorithmic fairness is concerned with addressing societal biases that are present in an algorithmic system. While fairness and transparency can be related, they are actually independent. Ensuring transparency does not ensure fairness, and vice versa. Instead, they are connected in-so-far as it is infinitely easier to detect fairness issues in algorithms that are transparent.