---
title: What is Algorithmic Transparency
---

## How do we define _algoirthmic transparency?_
_Suggested time: 5 minutes_

**Algorithmic transparency** is the principle that information about decisions made by algorithms should be visible to those who use, regulate, and are affected by the systems that employ those algorithms. Algorithmic transparency should enable the monitoring, checking, criticism, or intervention by interested parties. Generally, algorithmic transparency _is about the human understanding of algorithms_ <a href="https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/data-and-policy/article/think-about-the-stakeholders-first-toward-an-algorithmic-transparency-playbook-for-regulatory-compliance/10D7F194DB250DDF3A30471B5CEB9326" target="_blank">(Bell, Nov, Stoyanovich 2023)</a>.

Note that there is no single there is no single definition for algorithmic transparency. The definition we provide here is an amalgamation from Policy Briefs on algorithmic transparency and academic work. The definition is intentionally very broad, and can represent multiple meanings.

For example, in one situation, algorithmic transparency may mean that **people are able to anticipate what decision an algorithmic system would make**, and in another context it could mean **knowing the list of factors that are taken into account by the algorithmic system.**

As an analogy, consider that there are many ways to understand how a television set works. You can understand aspects like,
- What it does (ex. displays a picture)
- How to work it (ex. using the remote)
- How it works to the extent that you could fix it if it breaks or reconstruct it from the ground up

> It’s important to note that data scientists, researchers, managers, and even policymakers use a variety of definitions (and often interchange them) to speak about transparency. For example, researchers and data scientists most commonly use the term **explainability** to mean transparency, but other terms include _interpretability, understandability, intelligibility, comprehensibility, accountability, traceability, and legibility_.

<br>

## What are some examples of algorithmic transparency?

Algorithms have completely profileated the public and private sector, and ultimately our lives. Algorithms determine which movies are recommended to us on Netflix, what pages are at seen at the top of your Google search result, and even makes recommendations on what word we should type next in a text message. Many of these algorithms are not transparent, but here are 3 examples of algorithmic systems that _do_ have transparency in the wild:

- **Hiring:** It is increasingly common for companies to use _algorithmic hiring tools_ that automatically process and screen resumes that they receive from online job applicants. These tools are meant to "read" through resumes and select the best candidates for interviews. In New York City, it is now law that companies __must__ inform job applicants that their resume is being processed by an algorithm rather than a human <a href="https://journals.aom.org/doi/abs/10.5465/AMBPP.2021.264" target="_blank">(Zejnilovic et al. 2021)</a>.

- **Finance:** many banks uses algorithms to determine if an applicant should be accepted or denied for a loan. By law, if an algorithm recommends to reject an applicant, that algorithm must provide <a href="https://reasoncode.org/" target="_blank">_reason codes_</a> that are given to the applicant, such as "too many recently opened bank accounts with balances."

- **Education:** Many schools across the US have begun using algorithms to identify students that are risk of failing out of school. These systems are called <a href="https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/9/24/5569" target="_blank">_Early Warning Systems_</a>, and provide a score to school administrators and teachers for how likely a student is to fail. To support transparency, the algorithms behind the Early Warning Systems are made extremely simple, and normally involve adding up aspects like "how many times has the student been absent?", "how many classes have they failed in the past", and "how many times has the student been sent to detention?"

<!---
- **Hiring:** Algorithms are often used to automatically screen resumes. The companies using those algorithms will likely be interested in understanding how the algorithms are filtering and scoring resumes. Job applicants also have an interest in knowing whether or not their resumes will be screened by humans or algorithms.

- **Credit scores:** A person's credit score is determined by an algoirthm, that combines together factors like their credit score and their outstanding debt. Everyone deserves the right to know what attributes, factors, and inputs are used to generate that risk score.

- **Healthcare:** Advanced computer programs are regularly used to help doctors estimate the risk of disease for their patients. Algorithmic transparency is critiacl in helping the doctor understand why a patient is estimated to be high (or low) risk. In these high stakes environments, algorithmic transparency may literally be a matter of life and death.
-->

> _Excercise:_ What are some examples of algorithms that you encounter in your daily life, or at work? Are they transparent in any way?