---
title: Public Employment
---

## Case study: A _highly succesful_ algorithmic decision system used in public employment

The following case studies are intended to make the lessons of this playbook more concrete. These case studies we present here are fictional, but based on real-world examples. 

### Context

Algorithmic decision-systems are increasingly being used by government agencies to help unemployed persons. In particular, many governments are concerned with identifying individuals that are at risk of becoming _long-term unemployed_, that is, being unemployed for 12-months or more. The long-term unemployed are particularly vulnerable persons, and tend to earn less once they find new jobs, have poorer health and have children with worse academic performance as compared to those who had continuous employment.

In an ideal world, public employment agencies would be able to identify individuals who are likely to be long-term unemployed so that they can be given appropriate interventions to get ahead of the problem, like job search trainings, resume workshops, or reskilling programs. This is where algorithmic decision-systems come in to play: governments can use these systems to spot those at risk of becoming long-term unemployed. For instance, a system of _exactly_ this type is used by the national Portuguese vocational agency.

### How the system works

Once a person becomes unemployed, their change in employment status is often reported to a government agency, either by their previous employer or when an individual applies for unemployment benefits. For example, in the US, you must go through your state-level Department of Labor to receive benefits.

In this scenario, once a person registers that they are unemployed, they are assigned a case-worker known as a "job counsellor." The job counselor will reach out to the individual (either by phone or by scheduling an in-person meeting) to gather information like their age, marital status, education level, and their work history. This information, along with macroeconomic data related to the individual's employment sector and location of work, are passed into an **algorithmic system** used by the job counselor that generates a risk score between 1 and 5 for how likely it is that the person will become long-term unemployed. If someone is identified as a risk level of 5, they will be offered free job-related interventions by the state like resume workshops or even job trainings.